# Data analysis: Microplastic and organic carbon storage in sediments of intertidal and subtidal seagrass meadows     

# Overview

This repository contains the scripts used for the data analysis presented in the scientific article titled "Microplastic and organic carbon storage in sediments of intertidal and subtidal seagrass meadows" (not published yet). The article investigated the capacity of intertidal and subtidal seagrasses in capturing microplastics and store organic carbon in the sediments.    

# Contents

* README.md: This file, containing information about the repository and how to use it.    
* LICENSE: Information about the licensing of the code and data.    
* data/: Directory containing the data file used for the analysis.       
* scripts/: Directory containing the analysis script.   
* results/: Directory containing the results generated by the scripts: figures, tables, and processed data.    

# Requirements

To replicate the analysis, you will need the following software:

R Core Team (2023). _R: A Language and Environment for Statistical Computing_. R Foundation for Statistical Computing,
  Vienna, Austria. <https://www.R-project.org/>.
  
Posit team (2023). RStudio: Integrated Development Environment for R. Posit Software, PBC, Boston, MA. URL
  http://www.posit.co/.

To install the necessary packages, see the commands included in the script.    

# Usage

To run the analysis:

1. Clone this repository.   
2. Place the data files in the data/ directory.
3. Create a results/ directory contaning three directories: figures/, tables/ and processed/. 
4. Run the script in the scripts/ directory.  
5. Generated results will be saved in the results/ directory.

The main findings of this analysis can be found in the results/ directory. These include:

### Figures   

* Figure_2.pdf: A) Sedimentary organic carbon (OC) content (% dw); B) abundance of suspected  microplastics (SMP), and C) abundance of chemically identified microplastics (MP) along the depth profile for the replicated cores at the intertidal (Zn, Zostera noltei) and subtidal (Cn, Cymodocea nodosa) seagrass meadows.     
* Figure_3.pdf: A) Sedimentary organic carbon (OC) stock (g cm-2); B) stock of suspected microplastics (SMP, items cm-2) and C) stock of chemically identified microplastics (MP, items cm-2) for the top 100 cm sediment layer at the intertidal (Zn, Zostera noltei) and subtidal (Cn, Cymodocea nodosa) seagrass meadows. The lower and upper hinges of the boxplots correspond to the first and third quartiles; horizontal line corresponds to median and diamond to the mean. P-value is given for the Welch Two Sample t-tests to test for diferences between intertidal and subtidal meadows.    
* Figure_4.pdf: Relative distribution of microplastic categories at the intertidal (Zn, Zostera noltei) and subtidal (Cn, Cymodocea nodosa) seagrass meadows, regarding shape (A) and colour of suspected microplasics (SMP) (B), and polymer composition of microplastics (C).     
* Figure_5.pdf: Number of particles by combining (A) shape and colour, and (B) shape and polymer composition (B) characteristics.    
* Figure_6.pdf: Density distribution of the length of suspected microplastic (SMP) items at the intertidal (Zn, Zostera noltei) and subtidal (Cn, Cymodocea nodosa) seagrass meadows.     
* Figure_7.pdf: Correlation between organic carbon (OC) content (% dw) and A) suspected microplastic (SMP) and B) microplastics (MP) abundance (items kg-1 dw) across the sediment samples from the intertidal (Zn, Zostera noltei) and subtidal (Cn, Cymodocea nodosa) seagrass meadows.   

### Tables   
* table_general_mp_composition.csv
* table_general_smp_colour.csv
* table_general_smp_composition.csv
* table_general_smp_shape.csv
* table_habitat_mp_composition.csv
* table_habitat_smp_colour.csv
* table_habitat_smp_composition.csv
* table_habitat_smp_shape.csv      

# License

This project is licensed under GNU AFFERO GENERAL PUBLIC LICENSE. See the LICENSE file for details.

# Citation

If you use this code or data in your work, please cite the article:    

Van den Auwelant, C., Marín Beltrán, I, Cozzolino, L, de los Santos, CB. (submitted). Microplastic and organic carbon storage in sediments of intertidal and subtidal seagrass meadows.    

# Contact    

For questions, comments, or contributions, please contact:    

Carmen B. de los Santos    
Email: cbsantos@ualg.pt     
GitHub: @cbdelossantos    
